# arb4j Overview

## What is arb4j?

**arb4j** is a robust Java API designed to efficiently represent mathematical structures in their most general 
forms, prioritizing high performance. It seamlessly integrates with the [arblib](http://arblib.org) library 
via an interface generated by [SWIG](https://swig.org), enabling arbitrary precision real and complex ball 
arithmetic operations.

### Cheesy Storyline
As Fred "Holm" Flintstone chips away at the mathematical foundations of the quarry just outside the town of Bedrock,  
he uncovers a new instance of an application of the fabled Stone's theorem, a hidden gem within the dense layers of 
numbers and theories. This remarkable discovery isn't just a solitary triumph; it's powerfully amplified by the sophistication 
of "arb4j" and the FLINT libraries upon which it is built. Like the finest tools in a Bedrock artisan's 
kit, these modern marvels conjoin to carve out solutions and shape ideas with unparalleled precision. Here, 
in the convergence of past and present, Fred's quarry becomes a forge where mathematical history and future innovation 
meld seamlessly.


## Features and Usage Patterns

### Fluent Interface Pattern
- arb4j employs a fluent pattern wherever possible, enhancing the way functions receive and return values.
- Typically, the last argument in a function call becomes the return value, defaulting to `'this'` if not specified.

**Example:**
```java
Real x = new Real("25", 128); // 128 bits of precision

// Both lines achieve the same result:
Real five = x.sqrt(128);
Real five = x.sqrt(128, x); // Using 'this' as the result variable explicitly
```
- To prevent overwriting the input variable:
```java
Real five = x.sqrt(128, new Real());
```
- Chain function calls in an object-oriented way:
```java
Real y = new Real("25", 128)
            .add(RealConstants.one, 128)
            .log(128)
            .tanh(128);
```

### Resource Management with AutoCloseable
- The `AutoCloseable` interface is used for memory management.
- This implementation ensures that objects can and should be used within try-with-resources blocks for optimal resource handling, especially important for managing native resources.

**Example:**
```java
try (Real x = new Real("25", 128)) {
    doSomething(x);
} // x is automatically closed, ensuring proper resource management
```

### Advanced Tools

#### Expression Compiler
- The [arb.expressions](https://github.com/crowlogic/arb4j/tree/master/src/main/java/arb/expressions) package in arb4j includes tools for compiling mathematical [expressions](https://github.com/crowlogic/arb4j/blob/master/src/main/java/arb/expressions/Expression.java) directly into Java bytecode, eliminating the need for verbose Java code.

#### Automatic Differentiation of Expressions (Upcoming)
- A symbolic parser and compiler for automatic differentiation is in development. 
- Current progress can be tracked at: [GitHub Issue #253](https://github.com/crowlogic/arb4j/issues/253).

## Forked modularized version of jlatexmath 
See [this](https://github.com/crowlogic/jlatexmath) for a version of jlatexmath without the unnamed module warnings

## Licensing

arb4j is licensed under the Mozilla Public License 2.0. For more details, please refer to the [COPYRIGHT](https://github.com/crowlogic/arb4j/blob/master/COPYRIGHT) file in the project repository.






