as far as we know them the laws of
quantum mechanics are basic and if the
universe they apply to the universe as a
whole then the universe has a quantum
state what is that that's the central
problem of quantum cosmology if you
don't have any state then you don't have
any predictions because even an ordinary
quantum mechanics the probability is
some alternative like a range of
position is some projection operator
multiplied acting on the state you take
the square if you don't have the state
and you don't get any predictions so
from this point of view contemporary
theories final theories that are
supposed to apply to everything have two
parts they have a dynamical theory say a
super string theory and they have a
theory of the quantum state we can ask
which regularities of the universe that
we see both of them are in general
needed but which regularities come
mostly from one of those from the other
and I suspect here we've got an
unfinished task of beautification so
here's a list the shortlist of
properties the Hamiltonian dynamical
physics is local for the most part at
least on scales that we operate on and
so the Hamiltonian mostly explains
regularities in time the state on the
other hand explains mostly regularities
in space and so the existence of
classical space-time in a quantum
mechanical universe is something we
would hope would explain the early
homogeneity is revealed by the this
morning speaker the homeand homogeneity
and isotropy the inflation the fact that
fluctuations start in their ground state
right the arrows of time the fact that
there's a thermodynamic arrow of time
the CMB large-scale structure the
existence of isolated systems for which
there are none in the very early
universe may be the topology of the
space-time
a number of large and small dimensions
the number of time dimensions all these
things are things we might hope for
explained by the combination of these
two things now a theory the combination
of a theory my Hamiltonian a state
predicts what we call third person
probabilities probabilities for which of
a set of alternative histories occurs in
the universe but we don't see
four-dimensional histories what we see
are making particular observations for
example if you ask from this theory what
does it predict for the temperature of
the microwave background we will observe
it doesn't predict anything right
because the microwave background varies
with time right and so it will predict a
history for the microwave background but
to specify probabilities for our
observations we have to specify our
observational situation in particular in
that case the time at which we make the
measurement from the Big Bang so I have
indicated that by D and a large universe
this data deed that describes our
observational situation might be
replicated oh we know is there's one
instance these are called first-person
probabilities these condition
conditional probabilities and our
objective to test the theory test the
third person theory by its first person
predictions and agent side supplies some
probabilistic measure and then that
means anthropic reasoning which has been
alluded to in various tones here at this
talk and this conference is automatic in
quantum cosmology if you seek to predict
observations for for probabilities for
observations because the probability for
up an observation given data that
describes the situation by Bayes theorem
is just can be proportional we reverse
so if the probability is 0 for D we
won't observe it so we want to observe
what is where we can exist
that's anthropic reasoning anthropic
reasoning from follows from treating
observers in the universe as well as
part of the whole thing and not somehow
outside it looking at it that's not
require principle it's not an option and
it's not a subjective choice beg pardon
say one's will Fernando what was the
question
oh who is that that is Everett I wrote a
undergraduate textbook in which I showed
her pictures of a few people and then I
got letters I had completely the wrong
pictures for other people the whole
thing had to be reset on the next so
it's possible now most of our
observations about the universe or its
classical history but in quantum
mechanics a system is not sort of
guaranteed or not good is not classical
or not classical it's a matter of
quantum probabilities quantum systems
behave classically when the third person
probabilities are high for histories
which have correlations in time exhibit
correlations in time governed by
deterministic laws that's true for the
flight of a tennis ball when you throw
it right it could take some orbit for
the orbit of the earth around the Sun in
quantum mechanics it doesn't have to be
on a capillary in orbit it's only that
in the state it's in the probability is
high for Kepler in orbit and equally
well it's probably a probabilistic
matter for whether space-time behaves
classically obeying the Einstein
equations so classical space-time is an
approximation of the quantum mechanics
of gravity in a given state of the whole
universe so we want to find out what the
state is now one thing to mention has to
do with complexity a simple manageable
discoverable theory of the initial
condition of the universe that you might
write down Stephen did write can't
predict just one class
spacetime because if it did he would
have to predict all the complexity that
we see in the universe the particular
arrangement of people were they said in
these chairs and that would mean
intuitively that the description of the
state would be impossibly complex itself
rather a quantum state predicts an
ensemble of possible class times with
probabilities for the accidents that are
quantum accidents that occur in them the
accidents of biological evolution over
three billion years will then do a lot
of the present complexity they're
consistent with quantum mechanics but
they're not predicted with probability
one but with lower probabilities so the
state can be simple it only takes 45
keystrokes I counted them to write down
the know about your wave function and
but the individual insists histories and
can be very complex in the in samba as I
said an example of that is the
complexity of our own universe another
example which we'll be talking about
that's more relevant for my talk today
is the classical space times of false
vacuum internal inflation there we have
a region of space-time these space-time
diagram of eternal inflation where
bubbles of in false vacuum where bubbles
are true vacuumer nucleated has been
described by separate speakers giving
rise to a very complex mosaic bubbles
inflating regions bubbles inflating
regions bubbles of various kind but we
don't observe all that we only observe
the inside of one bubble our bubble the
problem is how is there a simple way to
calculate what is the probability for
our observations in one kinds double and
then we can coarse grain that is ignore
all the structure that's outside
quantum mechanics is I hope to tell you
supplies a manageable way to
coarse-grain very simply to do that I
have to give you a three slide
introduction to declare distance quantum
mechanics the most general objective and
every quantum theory is they take
everybody to would it to is the
prediction of probabilities for
histories in this case histories in the
whole universe or for the earth going
around the Sun and so these are
histories of space-time geometry field
but there's an obstacle to quantum
mechanics to predict histories which you
can see very clearly in the two-slit
experiment maybe you'd like to predict
the probability for the has an electron
gun and it's electron passes through a
screen with two slits and makes the
character is to get her Ference pattern
over here maybe you'd like to predict
the probability for whether went through
the upper slit and the lower slit but in
quantum mechanics problem probabilities
are squares of amplitudes and the
probability that it went through either
slit is the sum of the two amplitudes
squared the probability that went
through the upper slit system boom an
amplitude squared and the square the sum
is not equal to the sum of the squares
because of quantum interference so it's
inconsistent to assign probabilities to
that set of histories so which sets of
histories can't be assigned the ones for
which there's no interference right
textbook quantum mechanics assign
probabilities only two sets of histories
that were measured but we can't be
dealing with that we're not outside the
universe looking at it we're in so it
and you prove history's quantum
mechanics you assign probabilities the
sets of histories for which there's
negligible interference between the
members of the set as a consequence of
the theory in the Hamiltonian and so I
like for example several people have
asked me about Zurich right like when
you have an environment particles
bouncing off it and the region of the
two slits that will carry away the
phases between the upper stem and the
lowers
so decoherence employees consist of
probabilities we're not going to talk
much about think where it's of
space-time not because there's a lack of
time but because we don't know how to do
it but I'm going to assume they think
we're anybody well ok decoherence
enables makes coarse graining easy let's
suppose you have this is a spacetime
diagram little too high here X this way
T up there suppose we have a single
particle and quantum mechanics that
starts in some initial region right
passes through a middle region and winds
up in a final region then the
probability for that history initial
middle final is we have to note this way
and it's the square of some amplitude
which you can construct from some of our
histories quantum mechanics suppose
you're not interested in where it was in
the middle one way to calculate the
probability just that it started here
and wound up there is to sum these
probabilities over all the probabilities
for going through the middle just a
standard coarse graining but you can do
it another way
huh so that's this here sum of the
probabilities but it's also true that
you could just sum me amplitudes over
here that will give you a complete sum
over histories from I'd F and so the
probability is the square the amplitude
just to get from the initial thing to
the final thing so coarse graining can
be implemented in that way in quantum
mechanics so there are two equivalent
ways of doing it some of the
probabilities are some of the amplitudes
effectively leaving the thing that
you're ignoring out so in quantum
mechanics coarse graining can be carried
out by ignoring of course grading in
this sense enables what Hawking and her
tag called top-down reasoning in
cosmology we don't have to calculate the
fine-grained evolution of the universe
from the beginning all the way to the
end to make probabilities for what we
see today
right we'd rather do a coarser grain
calculation putting in some data now an
initial condition and asking how it got
to be that way
that's top-down reasoning and it's
enabled by what I just described in
quantum mechanics so I now want to say
how that applies through the quantum
nucleation of bubbles in a true vacuum
in a classical classical full vacuum I'm
gonna do this of course in mini super
space models easy I'm going to assume
that the geometries are homogeneous and
isotropic the geometries are closed
there's one scalar field which is now
just a function of time consistent with
the symmetries and then it moves in a
potential V of v the no boundary away
from the wave function is then a
function of the arguments at one time
the value of a right at any one time and
the value of the scalar field which i've
used two different letters for to be
confusing but it's also helps to
distinguish them the no boundary wave
function the semi-classical
approximation is just this it's it's in
the semi-classical approximation
it's e to the minus a saddle point a
saddle point which looks like this it
has its on a for disc it has one
boundary on which you have the arguments
and the wave function is big inside this
thing has a radius B and has a value of
the scalar field all overcoming and no
other boundary general those things are
complex but that's the answer as far as
the no boundary wave function goes I'm
not going to apply that to a pension
potential which does allow for false
vacuum in eternal inflation here it is
this potential has one false vacuum here
the unit for histories that are
concentrated here this those they will
expand rapidly with a cosmological
constant that's basically the distance
up like that but they can get out of
this by tunneling through these barriers
forming bubbles of true vacuum
so nucleation of true vacuum bubbles by
quantum racin that dominates the exit
channels there are a number of other
ones the different histories are labeled
by the starting values of 5 starting
here or maybe starting here rolling down
different slow roll regimes lead the
different predictions for both free
observe CMB which is basically a
function of the form of the potential
right near these minima and different
cosmological constants I have to specify
the state of course and will come of no
surprise that I'm going to specify
Stephens no boundary a wave function in
the semi-classical approximation any
wave function which is a function of the
three geometries and the fields being
Chi is of this form right where my
external some settle point
so a wave function in general is defined
by the collection of saddle points that
approximated if we're just going to use
the semi-classical approximation that's
sufficient and really all we can do
technically so if the wave function has
an integral representation right like we
originally posited for the no boundary
wave function
it's the contour of integration that
specifies the saddle points by which
saddle points if the contour can be
deformed it passed through the no
boundary wave function is usually
specified by a Euclidean and quotation
marks integral by analogy with
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics ground
states but it doesn't have to be
specified this way in a recent paper
Thomas and his students made it just a
tiny bit by me showed but it can also be
specified by a Lorentzian one but it's
an ordinary quantum mechanics there's no
reason every state has to be defined by
an integral it's true for ground States
but if you take an excited state of a
hydrogen atom it's not specified by some
by some integral and hey
no there's a semi-classical
approximation to be to the orbit and for
the no battery wavefunction the saddle
points can all suppose be specified by a
dual field theory as I help Thomas show
a little while ago and that turns out to
be an enormous leap powerful way of
formulating the no boundary wavefunction
as you will see in the next talk the
important thing now several people come
up to me and ask me about Neil stark
here a little while ago so this is my
answer right it doesn't have to be an
integral it doesn't have to be a
Lorentzian integral we specify it by the
saddle points there is a phenomena of
eternal inflation which Thomas will talk
about in the next talk but there isn't I
think any of these great distinctions
which are being made back to false
vacuum eternal inflation the theory
predicts with that potential not one
classical space-time but a multiverse of
possible ones with bubbles in different
places different kinds of bubbles these
are supposed to be yellow yellow green
and so forth the state these are
complicated the state has decent
symmetries right but the individual
histories do not that's important for
making predictions because now we can
course gram we coarse grain over
everything outside our bubble our bubble
wall so our bubble expanding at the
speed of light we can't see outside all
right
therefore we think of coarse grain we
want to sum over all of the structure
outside which is relevant for us but
using quantum mechanics we can we can
coarse grain simply by ignoring the
stuff outside and considering one bubble
our bubble so then there are only two
histories one of which the bubble
nucleated somewhere it doesn't matter
where it nucleated because of the sitter
asymmetry and through vacuum any and
they know there were a nucleated in true
vacuum being here the two hits
that are now involved in calculating
these various quarters grand
probabilities and here's the answer well
we know how to calculate one bubble this
is the population was done by Coleman
and de Lucia but you might worry where
are we we're supposed to be calculating
third person probabilities but in the
usual story there an infinite number of
Hubble volumes inside every bubble and
if there's a probability for however
small for for us to exist in one of the
Hubble volumes the probability will be 1
in each kind of bubble that there's a
copy of us so the probabilities for the
CMB that we observe are just in this
ratio of the Komen dilution
probabilities a big problem so I will
note that for to do this measure because
we course ghrelin reigned over the
large-scale structure and all measure
additional measure was nothing necessary
to deal with the infinities of the
number of bubbles beyond that that was
supplied by the no boundary wave
function even though in a finer-grained
description right there's an incredible
complexity of very large number bubbles
that's almost my talk but I want to go
on and make some there's been a lot of
discussion of multiverses here and I
want to support multiverses by
multiverse I will mean a situation with
the theory presents a multiplicity of
possibilities one of which has realized
observed experience whatever you want to
call it there's already in quantum
cosmology the quantum multiverse of the
many different classical histories that
are possible one of which we're living
in
there's the multiverse of true vacuum
bubbles and false vacuum of eternal
inflation as I just described with
different predictions for the
cosmological constant so quantum
mechanics by its very nature being
probabilistic predicts multiverses in
this sense as I think was first
emphasized by
burner car martin rees multiverse
multiverse idea is a very powerful idea
because it enables entropic selection
because as in this case it enables the
constants to vary one value of the
cosmological constant here another one
over here
so there's there's not just one history
with bubbles but an ensemble of possible
histories is a multiverse of histories
at a given level of course grading but
it's much better than that or much worse
than that
there are multiverses that exist in
different levels of coarse graining as
in the ones through which we calculated
the coma dilution probabilities which
were very simple people worry that we
don't see the other bubbles a number of
things to say about that we don't have
we have a multiverse consisting of
different histories we don't see in some
sense the histories in the ensemble
shredding heirs cat does not observe the
dead cat which is the alternative
history I'm sure it in your story we
don't see the other bubbles because
they're space like separated in us we
might see another bubble if there's a
collision between them in our past that
property of multiverse is very familiar
not just in physics not just in quantum
cosmology but everywhere for example in
biological evolution and biological
evolution we have a multiverse of
histories in which different thing
happened different mutations occurred
different stuff proliferated and so
forth we don't see it it's in the past
we can't see it and yet we believe it
because of the evidence today the
multiverse is that we're talking about
here or we don't see them right well
we'd be leaving the number
nonetheless because they're predicted by
if we believe in the theory our
multiverse is falsifiable well yes there
falsifiable if the ingredients to go in
it's construction or falsifying theory
the quantum state in this case through
the dynamics and a lot of different vacu
of a landscape where the common sense
fairy just like that theory of evolution
is falsified if the mechanisms for
genetic variation can be falsified
mutation genetic drift recombination and
fitness landscape if you can get rid of
that so you can't just a multiverse is
not just some idea that's added on
independent of the theory it's a
consequence of a particular class of
theories if you want to reject it you
have to get rid of that potential so you
for some reason that it doesn't exist
well I hope that settles multiverses
unlikely is that's going to be but then
you bring the part of the theory just
occur naturally they car every quantum
mechanical situation is just promoted
cosmology I don't like to return since I
have a few minutes to the list I had in
the beginning I have looked at my list
of I can't find my talk from night from
Stevens 60th birthday I think because
they use those pieces of plastic does
anybody remember I remember those Ryan I
didn't get to organize rather I only got
organized rather late but I did find one
from the previous one and I'd like to go
over the list of the successes of the no
boundary wavefunction relative to this
list so here's my slide does it predict
classical intro Lorentzian space-time
yes I didn't order in the details of how
it does that it's a state it predicts
histories Lorenson histories
does it predict early homogeneity is a
trippy and inflation yes right calculate
the models with those quantities not
done here of course does it predict
fluctuations in the ground state yes
because it's the analog of the ground
state and nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics defined by this Euclidean and
her goal in the fluctuations start out
small and I
just like the people that they described
in this morning does it predict the CMB
yes it predicts the fluctuations because
it's a quantum mechanical state and it
defines what the fluctuations are with
the probabilities for tomorrow we can
calculate does it predict anthropic
selection yesterday on the street in
that earlier on does it predict
classical physics after all yes because
it predicts that there are these
histories of the universe that are
correlated in time by iceland equation
by the Icelandic equation does it
predict quantum field theory and
backgrounds yes at some at some level
you can treat the geometry quantum
mechanically and keep the fuels sorry
the geometry classically keep the fields
quantum mechanically and look at those
and you get a quantum field theory in
curved space-time and what else have we
got here local prediction and in eternal
inflation next talk I think does itah
predict the evolution from complexity of
this event how complexity arises from
simplicity the early universe is simple
it's complex enough later on it's going
to be simple right
wake up to the accelerating phase and
nothing is is left but it of course
because it predicts the deviations from
simplicity moment you need in our
satrapy predicts them so that's the
scorecard of the wave no boundary
wavefunction but nothing we do now
compares to what we hope to do and many
other things that might be predicted if
we could imagine the topology of
space-time
after all the topology geometry
space-time geometry is a metric on a
manifold so it should predict something
about the manifold so they were they
were very early on there were works
about how that goes and Gary Gibbons and
I wrote a paper many decades ago right
which also gives some hits and that
might be true a number of large and
small dimension why do are there four
large ones
rest of them occur although a number of
time dimensions
why don't we only have two well it turns
out that doesn't really work very well
with the no boundary wavefunction for a
reason I could describe easily but
there's not time to do it does it
predict the unification of H inside why
do we have this division into a
dynamical theory and a state what we
don't have that right so that's still
something I think he has to be done
populating landscapes hints and finally
that's quantum mechanics itself what
evidence do we have the choir mechanics
which has been tested only on very small
scales scales of laboratory all right
and maybe in the beginning of the
universe if you believe these stories
applies to the universe as a whole it's
a little bit strange right to have a
theory which involves the principle of
superposition when there's only one
state in the entire universe
is there something deeper from which
quantum mechanics emerges well we don't
know so Steven happy birthday
right there is still a lot to do thank
you
thank you very much so there are
probably some questions yes wait for the
mic yeah I'd like to ask about the you
seem to have implied that the no
boundary proposal is is relatively
unique but certainly otherwise in
quantum mechanics were usually a face
with an enormous number of possibility
traces of states and among your list of
predictions wouldn't many of those also
be come out of other distinct choice to
the vacuum stays for probably the
Lincoln's we don't have a tunneling yeah
we don't have any evidence to see unique
I can tell you the history from my point
of view so any solution of the
appropriate wheeler DeWitt constraints
is a candidate for the wave function of
the universe so there's certainly plenty
of them right long ago right we were
struck by the fact that the
observational evidence shows that the
universe then at the time was simpler
than it is now
more homogeneous more isotropic more
nearly in thermal equilibrium those
seemed to be properties that are
associated with the ground state but
there isn't any ground state in
cosmology closed cosmology gravity
because the Hamiltonian is zero because
of time reprioritization invariant but a
none relativistic quantum mechanics you
don't have to calculate the ground state
from aides I equals e so I you can
calculate it from a Euclidean integral
so the idea was maybe the Euclidean
integral will give us a state and it's
true it gave us a state right for which
I've just listed all the successful
predictions precise for example the
fluctuations starting around their
ground state that where something will
naturally occur that was the analog of
the ground state but I can't exclude
that there couldn't be other ones right
we really think of the no boundary state
as a kind of model right for if we have
a deeper Association for example this
will be described in the next talk with
dualities we might learn some
yes so is there any way you can make any
sense of the idea of a pure state in
terms of what some we could observe
sorry is there any way we could a pure
state for the notice we can't observe
the whole universe right no I don't
think so and so there's no sense in
which you could ever test whether the
universe is in a pure State
no so that's a no assumptions assumption
yeah so because I think every system
does have a a state despite what a lot
of people tell me right but so it's the
sort of simplest phone of Gannicus we
can do I don't think you contestant
Pierce day not unless you can replicate
it right and do it all over again so bad
luck for that but maybe there's
something it seems to me you're losing
the information despite I understand the
standard objections to this point of
view but I believe mine anyway yes so on
your checklist you had one entry
locality which didn't have a score so
could you please elaborate
probably it was probably keynoting
competence or something a locality where
did why our field theories local it
didn't have a score because I have no
idea why it should be local
is it anthropic that is we of course
exploit the locality all the time you
went to lunch up there when I came down
to set down here you're functioning fine
and indeed it'd be hard to imagine I
guesses or rather information gathering
usually utilizing systems they exploit
the locality because they learn here
apply there right and they move in
between them but is is that just our
particular situation but trouble is we
don't have any idea except this is the
realm of fried oil remember you know
remember the black cloud a object that
came around the Sun and was intelligent
we don't have any idea but all the ones
we've seen so far which are very limited
exploit locality so why is that this is
some other reason that the theories are
local why don't they know no that's why
there's nothing in the box it didn't
answer that question they assumed it
yeah what are the prospects if any of
testing any of these things with analog
condensed matter systems for example
well the analogs and simple systems are
the ground states right so there's
plenty of would be but you know the fact
that you know ground states or can be
computed in certain ways I wouldn't say
the success of that project high
symmetries for examples of characterized
but of characterization of condensed
matter ground States typically I
wouldn't build much confidence in a
theory of the universe from the success
of the series in the laboratory the
context is so completely different
having a university which were inside
not measuring just experiencing
different from a laboratory situation
where we measure control that's all out
there okay thanks very much let's take
Jim again
you